Ilariae/delegated guardians (#812)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: docs/products/reference/glossary.md

## Emitter

The emitter contract makes the call to the Wormhole Core Contract. The published message includes the emitter contract address, and a sequence number is tracked to provide a unique ID.

## Finality

The finality of a transaction depends on its blockchain properties. Once a transaction is considered final, you can assume the resulting state changes it caused will not be reverted.

## Guardian

> A [Guardian](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank} is one of the 19 parties running validators in the Guardian Network contributing to the VAA multisig. They may be referred as Canonical Guardians in the context of delegated observation.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be in the context of the chain rather than the observation itself:
```suggestion
A [Guardian](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank} is one of the 19 parties running validators in the Guardian Network contributing to the VAA multisig. They may be referred as Canonical Guardians in the context of a delegated chain.
```

## Guardian Network

Validators operating in a dedicated P2P network that serve as Wormhole's oracle layer. Guardians monitor on-chain activity and generate signed messages (VAAs) attesting to it.

> For full Guardian Set chains, all 19 Guardians perform direct on-chain observation. For chains configured for delegated observation, a delegated subset monitors and broadcasts signed observations to the rest of the network. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegated quorum before signing. Regardless of the observation path, VAAs are always finalized as standard 13-of-19 multisignature attestations.

Reviewer 2: 13-of-19 is not going to be the case for delegated guardian observations.

Author: so how would this work? The notion says "they’ll publish their own signed observations until eventually a regular 13/19 VAA is produced."

Reviewer 3: They will all sign the VAA but for delegated chains, only delegated guardians perform direct-on-chain observation

Reviewer 3: Actually yes, this is OK as it is written.
I would maybe change "a delegated subset monitors and broadcasts signed observations" with "a delegated subset monitors and broadcasts delegated signed observations" to be more precise

> For full Guardian Set chains, all 19 Guardians perform direct on-chain observation. For chains configured for delegated observation, a delegated subset monitors and broadcasts delgated signed observations to the rest of the network. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegated quorum before signing. Regardless of the observation path, VAAs are always finalized as standard 13-of-19 multisignature attestations.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation"

```suggestion
For full Guardian Set chains, all 19 Guardians perform direct on-chain observation. For delegated chains, a delegated subset monitors and broadcasts signed delegate observations to the rest of the network. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegate quorum before signing. Regardless of the observation path, VAAs are always finalized as standard 13-of-19 multisignature attestations.
```

Reviewer: If you think just mentioning "delegated chains" is not clear enough, we could add a glossary entry for it.
Alternatively, we could also just inline it in parenthesis along the lines of:

```
For delegated chains (chains that have a delegated guardian set configured)...
```

## Guardian Set

The Guardian Set is the canonical set of 19 Guardians responsible for producing VAAs. A supermajority of 13 signatures is required to generate a valid VAA.

> For certain chains, governance may configure a delegated subset of the Guardian Set to perform direct on-chain observation with a smaller per-chain quorum. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegated quorum before signing, ensuring that the effective security threshold for a chain cannot fall below its configured level.

Reviewer: The delegate vs delegated naming is not consistent but mimics the naming convention in the code:
* Anything to do with guardians, chains or config is `delegated`. 
  - eg:- Delegated chains, Delegated Guardians, `DelegatedGuardianSet`, `DelegatedGuardianChainConfig`, etc.
* Anything to do with the gossip messages is `delegate`.
  - eg:- `DelegateObservation`s, `SignedDelegateObservation`s, delegate quorum, delegate threshold, etc.

```suggestion
For certain chains, governance may configure a delegated subset of the Guardian Set to perform direct on-chain observation with a smaller per-chain quorum. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegate quorum before signing, ensuring that the effective security threshold for a chain cannot fall below its configured level.
```

The composition of the Guardian Set may change through governance actions.

## Delegated Guardian

> A Guardian configured to perform direct on-chain observation for a specific chain that uses delegated observation. Delegated Guardians broadcast signed `DelegateObservation` messages to the Guardian gossip network.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chain that uses delegated observation"
```suggestion
A Guardian configured to perform direct on-chain observation for a delegated chain. Delegated Guardians broadcast `SignedDelegateObservation` messages to the Guardian gossip network.
```

> In contrast, a Canonical Guardian does not observe that chain directly, it waits for enough `DelegateObservation` messages (the delegated quorum) before contributing its signature to the VAA.

Reviewer: See [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
In contrast, a Canonical Guardian does not observe that chain directly, it waits for enough `DelegateObservation` messages (the delegate quorum) before contributing its signature to the VAA.
```

> The key distinction: on a chain configured for delegated observation, Delegated Guardians run full nodes and watch the chain themselves, while Canonical Guardians trust the delegated quorum before signing. The final VAA is still a standard 13-of-19 multisig regardless.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
The key distinction: on a delegated chain, Delegated Guardians run full nodes and watch the chain themselves, while Canonical Guardians trust the delegate quorum before signing. The final VAA is still a standard 13-of-19 multisig regardless.
```
